README.md, before:

# Coreboot Kernel Loader

This repository contains code for building a [coreboot](https://www.coreboot.org/) payload which
directly boots into a kernel that is available in memory.

Supported kernels are:

* Linux kernel image. The boot follows the Linux [x86 32-bit Boot
Protocol](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/x86/boot.html#bit-boot-protocol).
* 32 bit ELF binary. The boot is [Multiboot](https://www.gnu.org/software/grub/manual/multiboot/multiboot.html) compliant (version 1 only).

The payload assumes that a qemu [fw_cfg](https://github.com/qemu/qemu/blob/master/docs/specs/fw_cfg.rst) device is available and obtains the exact memory addresses from this device. During the boot process, the payload inspects the following items in `fw_cfg`:

- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/kernel_addr`: (mandatory) the start address of the kernel in
  memory
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_addr`: (optional) the start address of the raw initrd image in
  memory
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_size_addr`: (optional) the address of the 32-bit value in memory
  which holds the size of the initrd image
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/cmdline_addr`: (optional) the address of the command line string in memory

Files in this directory have been frankensteined from coreboot's sources, in particular:

- `Makefile` from `payloads/libpayload/sample`
- `linux_params.h` from `util/cbfstool/linux.h`
- `fw_cfg.[h/c]` from `mainboard/emulation/qemu-i440fx/`

## Building

The build process depends on coreboot's [libpayload](https://www.coreboot.org/Libpayload)
and assumes that the necessary cross-compile toolchain is available in `$PATH`.

```
$ export LIBPAYLOAD_DIR=<libpayload install directory>
$ make
```

## Running

After adding the payload of this repository to a coreboot image with `cbfstool`, it can be used in
qemu to boot a linux kernel like this:

```
# Adding integers to qemu's fw_cfg device is a bit awkward because you can only add files
# or strings, so we need to create simple files which contain the little-endian byte representation
# of the respective addresses.

echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x40" > kernel_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x60" > initrd_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x20" > initrd_size_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x10" > cmdline_addr
echo -n -e "earlyprintk=ttyS0 console=ttyS0\x00" > cmdline_file

qemu-system-x86_64 -bios "${COREBOOT_FILE}" -nographic -serial mon:stdio -m 2G -enable-kvm \
  -device loader,addr=0x40000000,file="${KERNEL_FILE}",force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x60000000,file="${INITRD_FILE}",force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x10000000,file=./cmdline_file,force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x20000000,data=$(stat --printf="%s" "${INITRD_FILE}"),data-len=4 \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/kernel_addr,file=./kernel_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_addr,file=./initrd_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/cmdline_addr,file=./cmdline_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_size_addr,file=./initrd_size_addr
```

Commit message:

Require boot protocol 2.10
We require Linux boot protocol version 2.10 and above from
now on because we want to read the preferred address from
the kernel image and load kernels to this address.

README.md, after:

# Coreboot Kernel Loader

This repository contains code for building a [coreboot](https://www.coreboot.org/) payload which
directly boots into a kernel that is available in memory.

Supported kernels are:

* Linux kernel image. The boot follows the Linux [x86 32-bit Boot
Protocol](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/x86/boot.html#bit-boot-protocol). We support kernels in bzImage format
  that follow boot protocol version 2.10 and above.
* 32 bit ELF binary. The boot is [Multiboot](https://www.gnu.org/software/grub/manual/multiboot/multiboot.html) compliant (version 1 only).

The payload assumes that a qemu [fw_cfg](https://github.com/qemu/qemu/blob/master/docs/specs/fw_cfg.rst) device is available and obtains the exact memory addresses from this device. During the boot process, the payload inspects the following items in `fw_cfg`:

- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/kernel_addr`: (mandatory) the start address of the kernel in
  memory
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_addr`: (optional) the start address of the raw initrd image in
  memory
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_size_addr`: (optional) the address of the 32-bit value in memory
  which holds the size of the initrd image
- `opt/de.cyberus-technology/cmdline_addr`: (optional) the address of the command line string in memory

Files in this directory have been frankensteined from coreboot's sources, in particular:

- `Makefile` from `payloads/libpayload/sample`
- `linux_params.h` from `util/cbfstool/linux.h`
- `fw_cfg.[h/c]` from `mainboard/emulation/qemu-i440fx/`

## Building

The build process depends on coreboot's [libpayload](https://www.coreboot.org/Libpayload)
and assumes that the necessary cross-compile toolchain is available in `$PATH`.

```
$ export LIBPAYLOAD_DIR=<libpayload install directory>
$ make
```

## Running

After adding the payload of this repository to a coreboot image with `cbfstool`, it can be used in
qemu to boot a linux kernel like this:

```
# Adding integers to qemu's fw_cfg device is a bit awkward because you can only add files
# or strings, so we need to create simple files which contain the little-endian byte representation
# of the respective addresses.

echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x40" > kernel_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x60" > initrd_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x20" > initrd_size_addr
echo -n -e "\x00\x00\x00\x10" > cmdline_addr
echo -n -e "earlyprintk=ttyS0 console=ttyS0\x00" > cmdline_file

qemu-system-x86_64 -bios "${COREBOOT_FILE}" -nographic -serial mon:stdio -m 2G -enable-kvm \
  -device loader,addr=0x40000000,file="${KERNEL_FILE}",force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x60000000,file="${INITRD_FILE}",force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x10000000,file=./cmdline_file,force-raw=on \
  -device loader,addr=0x20000000,data=$(stat --printf="%s" "${INITRD_FILE}"),data-len=4 \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/kernel_addr,file=./kernel_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_addr,file=./initrd_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/cmdline_addr,file=./cmdline_addr \
  -fw_cfg opt/de.cyberus-technology/initrd_size_addr,file=./initrd_size_addr
```
